---
title: Happy new year!
summary: |
    My overarching goal for 2024 is implementing a small, simple 
    programming language, that compiles to WASM. This post is a 
    reflection on how I got here and how I plan to do it.
tags: []
date: 2024-01-07
author: Matthias
---


For the past 10 years, I have been trying to get into the habit of
writing about programming and technology. During that time, the
biggest hurdle I faced when sitting in front of a blank editor, was to
find an interesting and worthwhile topic.

Everything that came to my mind seemed to have been discussed to death
somewhere on the internet, including how to find things to write about
and [why people should blog][you-should-blog]. That is to be expected,
since the main source of information for me is the internet. Which
means, I would probably not know about a topic, if someone hadn't
already written about it before. Which is why I never felt, like
another opinion would move the needle too much.[^monads]

There are many other reasons, though almost all of them boil down to
cop outs and non-reasons. Embarrassingly the "my editor environment is
not right" reason is on that list, which is just irrational.


## What has changed?

At the end of 2023 I had several realizations. Most of them were
consequences of actually feeling, that I *do* enjoy writing. The
moment that occurred to me, all the seemingly difficult obstacles and
reasons for not writing vanished. I also noticed a shift in my
mindset. Instead of seeing this as a space where I try to assume the
role of a teacher, I started seeing this as a space where I assume the
role of a student and just jot down my notes, hopefully in an ordered
and coherent manner.

That also means, finding a topic is actually very simple: I just write
about what I am interested in. When I look at my past 11 years in
programming, the two topics which I have been consistently fascinated
by are: *compilers* and *games*. However, my main focus in 2024 will
be on programming languages and compilers.

That's because in the past I always wanted to do everything
*instantly*, like right *now*. Shifting the perspective once again and
seeing a year as 52/53 weeks with slow consistent steps, instead of
burning like a wildfire and sizzling out in a week is much healthier
and much more sustainable.


## Plan

New years resolutions don't work well, when there is no concrete,
achievable goal.

So, my overarching goal for 2024 is to work on a small, simple
programming language, that compiles to WASM and that I can use to
solve at least one Advent of Code problem.

To achieve that, I will write a post per week and release it at the
latest at 6 p.m. (CE(S)T) on Sunday.

There might be other posts in between, about things that came up at
work or something I played around with in my free time but that is and
will remain my main goal for this year.


## A note on a life lesson

The main life lesson I take away from all of this, is that if you
start being honest with yourself, recognize what you want and you feel
deeply about, it becomes almost obvious, what you have to do. Writing
that, I am reminded of a conversation with a former professor of mine
in which he said that the solutions to most problems become obvious,
when you actually understand the problem. That has stuck with me and
applied in many situations and I think it applies equally in this
case.

Take care!


[you-should-blog]: https://sites.google.com/site/steveyegge2/you-should-write-blogs
[^monads]: I am still thinking about that Monad tutorial though... ;-)
